Everyone I know who makes money, joy, or community—generally a combination thereof—within the imperfectly bracketed space of the “art world” has, in the past year, reevaluated their relationship to the category of art and the practice of artmaking. Art showed its face in 2020: it could definitely do something, but it couldn’t stem the tide of the ongoing ravages of climate change; couldn’t get politicians into or out of office, offer up alternatives to electoral politics, or make desperately needed socialist/communist change possible; couldn’t resurrect those murdered by racism and racists or abolish policing and prisons; couldn’t halt a global pandemic or the social and economic devastation it’s wrought.

In most cases, the art world could not mount a response to these deeply interwoven crises nimbly enough for its various spaces and actors to be considered useful. While our cities and small towns and forested lands burned—either due to the warming earth or to the necessary outpouring of rage at the utter inequality of life as it’s lived in America—galleries and museums perhaps reevaluated the racial makeup of their boards or made donations in support of Black lives, then resumed brainstorming how the art-viewing experience might be digitized for the pandemic era. In one particularly flagrant example of institutions’ unwillingness to reconsider their priorities, Hauser & Wirth announced a fundraising initiative in which artworks were sold—not to benefit Black lives, or the livelihoods of artistic practitioners, or even the individuals who staff these institutions, but…the institutions themselves. Among the spaces described by Hauser & Wirth as “extremely vulnerable in this moment” was the New Museum, which, in 2020, laid off an outsized number of its own staff who had unionized in 2019, while its executive director Lisa Phillips continued to take home hundreds of thousands of dollars a year.

In Philadelphia, where so many mass actions begin and/or end at the steps of the city’s best-known art museum—which also successfully unionized in 2020—protestors last spring and summer did not find refuge within those walls, which could’ve been opened up as a resource to the public. Sometimes it hits me that many of the most crucial public actions last year, from mass protest to encampment fortifications, unfolded along Philadelphia’s parkway, against the backdrop of its most prestigious and moneyed institutions. In terms of a shifting relationship to art, everyone has their own story; the tipping point is a personal matter. Mine came on the first day of June of this last endless year when, along with thousands others, I was teargassed at the foot of the Barnes Foundation. Recovering by the shuttered admissions booth, it suddenly and absurdly occurred to me that my companion that day, Wilmer, had exhibited his work here three years prior. As we coughed and heaved and rifled through our backpacks for water, people around us fleeing in every direction from the chemical clouds, I remembered that opening, how I’d dressed up and drank wine and was nervous, how it seemed very important. I wondered briefly whether and when anything like that would happen again, then my thoughts shifted from whether and when to why.

I think this is what is meant by a conflict of interest, a phrase I’ve been drawn to for several years now. The only time it entered my life with any regularity was when I worked in an editorial capacity for the College Art Association, which maintains and often argues, rethinks, and revises its Statement on Conflict of Interest and Confidentiality for its journals, committees, boards, and so on. Particularly since part of CAA’s mission is to set ethical standards for the fields of art and art history within academia, it seems advisable to safeguard against nepotism as much as possible. Sometimes, though, when I worked there and would comb through the language of the COI statement on a granular level, it felt, to me, impossible. A reviewer of an exhibition couldn’t have any sort of relationship to the exhibition’s curator? An editor couldn’t assign a piece to herself or anyone on the editorial board of that journal? It felt out of step with my understanding of how the art world functions, which is not to offer up an endorsement of how the art world functions. It was hard to imagine art without imagining the entanglement of personal and professional relations, even if it felt worthwhile to try.

There’s no one involved in this small project, Conflicts of Interest, who I don’t know intimately. The scope and nature of this intimacy varies widely across contributors, but remains a thread between them and me. I’m personally invested in everyone whose work appears here, and I’ve approached the task of commissioning and editing their work differently—in ways I both can and can’t quantify—than if the process had been double- or single-blind. This is my first conflict of interest.

The next is that I’d like to see the art world burned entirely to the ground and reimagined, and I’d also like to retain a place within that world for myself and the people I care about. I spent most of the pandemic working at a grocery store, which offered up its own suite of traumas, but now I’m back in the realm of art-work and clinging to last year’s righteous anger which, for so many art institutions, is easily assimilable into corporate restructuring efforts. It strikes me as distinctly vile, and yet I do have a vested interest in the survival of the art world on multiple levels. There’s me—hard not to make oneself primary, despite efforts to the contrary—and the money I have made and stand to make within the ecosystem of artistic production, namely writing about art and editing other people’s writing about art. I’m a grantee of the Velocity Fund, which made this project possible, because I exist within art spaces, know where to look for funding and how to assemble a grant application, and have committed to a project rooted in the broad spectrum of “art or about art.” Then there are my friends and colleagues who sustain a life as artists, art handlers, writers, curators, editors, arts administrators, people who sit at the front desk, people who stand at the front door, people who guard the artwork, people who make sure the money lands in the correct bank accounts. I want them to feel fulfilled and secure. I want the same for myself. If art is the space in which we can all find that fulfillment and security, why not art? The answer to this in my own internal dialogue is that the structures that hold the art world in place were not built with us in mind—even if we are the very “creators of content”—and will continue to swerve away from our needs at every turn, unless we become unrecognizable to ourselves.

I’ve learned a lot from my peers, particularly over the past year, about how we can collectivize within the structures that already exist. Maybe one day we’ll be the ones spearheading capital campaigns that raise millions of dollars, and from there we can choose to redistribute that money instead of erecting new structures built with only the tiniest segment of the population in mind, designed for the ceaseless churn of future capital campaigns. Or we can take over buildings that used to house art and transform them into spaces that house people, pushing the art into spaces we haven’t yet envisioned. Or we could create new spaces contingent on the equal and fair pay of everyone involved, spaces we could dismantle if and when that equality and fairness was no longer possible. Marcia Tucker, founder of the same New Museum that now siphons large portions of its operating budget into building expansions and teams of union-busting lawyers, envisioned the museum as a space that would operate nonhierarchically, collaboratively, and transparently, that would “question our own premises and methods regularly” and operate as a laboratory for new thought and practice. Experiments fail, on the level of individual praxis all the way up to the level of the nation-state. We could commit to dissolving our institutions when they no longer live up to any of the dictates of the mission statement.

And then what? Or, perhaps the question is: in the meantime, what?

I had originally envisioned this project as something specifically physical. I was—and remain—inspired and energized by publication projects like the Real Review and Packet Biweekly, and I wanted to create something beautiful and incisive but unprecious, released on a monthly basis, a single sheet of writing and/or/about art almost literally flung around the city to non-art spaces. But the moment in which I wrote the grant proposal and the moment we’re living in now are very different. Even as spaces begin to reopen, entering buildings like libraries, coffee shops, student unions, and other storefronts is different now and perhaps always will be.

More critically, though, the idea of tossing around art criticism in the streets began to feel almost hatefully out of touch with the needs of Philadelphians navigating crushing precarity within a global pandemic. So, like everything else, Conflicts of Interest took a digital turn, and I often wondered whether the project had wandered so far from my original idea that I should just scrap it and return the grant money. I dragged my feet, as anyone involved in the project and the Velocity Fund itself can attest (sorry about all the missed deadlines, late emails, and the fact that the project is coming out a year and a half after it was supposed to!). Like almost everyone else, I lost jobs and took jobs I didn’t want to take and struggled with the people I love and struggled with myself and all the while this project hung over the scene, an unwelcome reminder of the specific ease of the life we all used to live. The instability of our situation had been building for some time, but it was nice to pretend it came on all at once in 2020.

I initially wrote this statement in the fall of 2020 and have revisited it now, in the spring of 2021, when things look a little different but most of these fundamental questions remain unanswered. I’ve tweaked the pastness of my tenses but basically everything else is the same. If any of the wording in these contributions feels anachronistic, it’s because I took so long pulling the project together—but I felt it was important to retain the integrity of the moment in which these pieces were written, performed, produced. I am so grateful to the contributors for offering a piece of themselves to this project, particularly at a time when there were and continue to be much more dire, pressing needs at stake. And I am bowled over by the generosity and vision of Rahul, in whom I found not just a website designer but a collaborator. Rahul breathed new life and energy into this project when I really needed it and pushed me in the direction of thinking about Conflicts of Interest as a directory and a series of nodes; his playfulness helped stave off the death trap of taking oneself and one’s work too seriously.

Websites aren’t institutions, not intrinsically. But they can be. They can also provide an alternative to institutional showcase (even as they become institutional showcase, as is becoming a norm), which is what I hope is happening here. I’ve given myself and others the latitude to say things and make gestures that feel necessary and wouldn’t be welcomed elsewhere. The scope of it is limited; it has to be. It is also literally limited to audiences in and around Philadelphia, hilariously (also Rahul). My intention is for it to live on beyond the ambit of this project, this granting period, this specific moment in time as a home for unconventional thought.